[ADR] 51. Pulsar MailQueue (#829)
apache/james-project: src/adr/0052-pulsar-mailqueue.md

 [ADR 4](0004-distributed-tasks-listing.md) [ADR 5](0005-distributed-task-termination-ackowledgement.md) 
 [ADR 6](0006-task-serialization.md) [ADR 7](0007-distributed-task-cancellation.md) 
 [ADR 8](0008-distributed-task-await.md), eventually allowing to drop the RabbitMQ technology all-together.

We could then create a new artifact relying solely on Pulsar, and deprecate the RabbitMQ based artifact.

Priorities are not yet supported by the current implementation. See [JIRA-XXXX](TODO).

A bug regarding clear not purging delayed messages had been 
[reported](https://github.com/apache/james-project/pull/808#discussion_r780162174) as well.

A broader adoption of Pulsar would benefit from performance insights.

This work could be continued, for instance under the form of a Google Summer of Code for 2022.

## Technical details

[[This section requires a deep review]]

[Akka](https://akka.io/) actor system is used in single node mode as a processing framework.

The MailQueue relies on the following topology:

 - out topic :  contains the mails that are ready to be dequeued.
 - scheduled topic: emails that are delayed are first enqueued there.

>  - filter topic: Deletions (name, sender, recipients) prior a given sequence are synchronized between nodes using this topic.

Author: ```suggestion
 - filter topic: Deletions (name, sender, recipients) prior a given sequence are synchronized between nodes using this topic.
 
 The consumers on out topic and scheduled topic use the same subscription name and shared consumers. On filter topic, each consumer uses a unique subscription name and will therefore receive a copy of every messages in the topic. this ensures a full distribution of the filter state to all nodes in the cluster.
```

Scheduled messages have their `deliveredAt` property set to the desired value. When the delay is 
expired, the message will be consumed and thus moved to the out topic. Flushes simply copy content of the scheduled
topic to the out topic then reset the offset of the scheduled queue, atomically. Expired filters are removed.

Note that in current versions of pulsar there is a scheduled job that handles scheduled messages, the accuracy of scheduling is limited by the frequency at which this job runs.

The size of the mail queue can be simply computed from the out and scheduled topics.

Upon deletes, the condition of this deletion, as well as the sequence before which it applies is synchronized across
nodes an in-memory datastructures wrapped in an actor. Each instance uses a unique subscription and thus will maintain a
set of all deletions ever performed.

Upon dequeues, messages of the out topic are filtered using that in-memory data structure, then exposed as a reactive 
publisher.

Upon browsing, both the out and scheduled topics are read from the consumption offset and filtering is applied.

Upon clear, the out topic is deleted.

Miscellaneous remarks:

>  - The pulsar admin client is used to list existing queues and to move  the current offset of scheduled message subscription upon flushes.

Author: ```suggestion
 - By design the implementation doesn't try to offer absolute consistency guarantees. We tend to lean on the side of eventual consistency. For instance message moved for scheduled to out topics might temporarily be browsed in double or deletes might not apply instantly.
 - The pulsar admin client is used to list existing queues and to move  the current offset of scheduled message subscription upon flushes.
```

 - Priorities are not yet supported.

>  - Only metadata transit through Pulsar. The general purpose of James blobStore, backed by a S3 compatible API, is used to
>    store the underlying email content. Saves on top of object-storage is latency prone and exposed to end SMTP clients.

Author: ```suggestion
 - Only metadata transit through Pulsar. The general purpose of James blobStore, backed by a S3 compatible API, is used to
   store the underlying email content. Please note that in the context of a mail queue, the tradeoffs behind a blob store choice are different: in long term storage cheaper storage cost would be preferable to higher latencies, especially for writes done asynchronously whereas a mailQueue would benefit from more expensive low latency storage (email do not stay there long) with low write latencies (user facing in SMTP). We might benefit in the future to support usage of a distinct blob store solution to back the queue.
```

implementation.

Helm charts to ease deployments are available.

Pulsar is however complex to deploy and relies on the following components:

 - Stateless brokers
 - Bookies (Bookkeeper) maintaining the persistent log of messages
 - ZooKeeper quorum used for cluster-level configuration and coordination
 
This would make it suitable for large to very-large deployments or PaaS.

The Pulsar SDK is handy and handles natively reactive calls, retries, dead lettering, making implementation less 
boiler plate.

## Decision

Provide a distributed mail queue implemented on top of Pulsar for email metadata, using the blobStore to store email 
content.

Package this mail queue in a simple artifact dedicated to distributed mail processing.

## Consequences

We expect an easier way to operate a cheaper and more reliable MailQueue.

We expect delays being supported as well.

## Complementary work

Pulsar technology would benefit from a broader adoption in James, eventually becoming the de-facto standard solution 
backing Apache James messaging capabilities.

To reach this status the following work needs to be under-taken:

>  - The Pulsar MailQueue needs to work on top of a deduplicated blob store. To do this we need to be able to list blobs 
>  referenced by the Pulsar MailQueue, see [JIRA-XXXX](TODO).

Author: ```suggestion
 - The Pulsar MailQueue needs to work on top of a deduplicated blob store. To do this we need to be able to list blobs 
 referenced by the Pulsar MailQueue, see [JAMES-3703](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/JAMES-3703).
```

>  - The event bus (described in [ADR 37](0037-eventbus.md)) would benefit from a Pulsar implementation, replacing the 
>  existing RabbitMQ one (described in [ADR-38](0038-distributed-eventbus.md)). See [JIRA-XXXX](TODO).

Author: ```suggestion
 - The event bus (described in [ADR 37](0037-eventbus.md)) would benefit from a Pulsar implementation, replacing the 
 existing RabbitMQ one (described in [ADR-38](0038-distributed-eventbus.md)). See [JIRA-3699](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/JAMES-3699).
```

 - While being less critical, a task manager implementation would be needed as well to replace the RabbitMQ one
 described in [ADR 2](0002-make-taskmanager-distributed.md) [ADR 3](0003-distributed-workqueue.md) 
 [ADR 4](0004-distributed-tasks-listing.md) [ADR 5](0005-distributed-task-termination-ackowledgement.md) 
 [ADR 6](0006-task-serialization.md) [ADR 7](0007-distributed-task-cancellation.md) 
 [ADR 8](0008-distributed-task-await.md), eventually allowing to drop the RabbitMQ technology all-together.

We could then create a new artifact relying solely on Pulsar, and deprecate the RabbitMQ based artifact.

A broader adoption of Pulsar would benefit from performance insights.

This work could be continued, for instance under the form of a Google Summer of Code for 2022.

### Nice to have complementary work

>  - The Pulsar MailQueue needs to work on top of a deduplicated blob store. To do this we need to be able to list blobs 
>  referenced by the Pulsar MailQueue, see [JIRA-XXXX](TODO).

Author: ```suggestion
 - The Pulsar MailQueue needs to work on top of a deduplicated blob store. To do this we need to be able to list blobs 
 referenced by the Pulsar MailQueue, see [JIRA-3703](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/JAMES-3703).
```
